Add general document (#50)
bonsai-rx/sgen: docs/articles/basic-usage.md

# Basic usage

## Automatic generation of Bonsai code using Bonsai.Sgen

We will expand this example later, but for now, let's see how to use `Bonsai.Sgen` to automatically generate Bonsai code for the `Person` object.

First, define the schema of the object in a JSON file:

[person](~/workflows/person.json)

```json
{
  "title": "Person",
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "Age": { "type": "integer" },
    "FirstName": { "type": "string" },
    "LastName": { "type": "string" },
    "DOB": { "type": "string", "format": "date-time" }
  }
}
```

Next, run the `Bonsai.Sgen` tool to generate the Bonsai code:

```shell
dotnet bonsai.sgen --schema docs/workflows/person.json --output docs/workflows/Extensions/PersonSgen.cs
```

> Finally, use the generated code in your Bonsai workflow:

Author: I would rather not repeat the Extensions/scriptin tutorial here. What you mentioned are points that are not related to the sgen and instead to bonsai extensions themselves. For instance, in some project I am using Bonsai.Sgen without Extensions at all, and instead relying on compiling first citizen packages. I think I will probably add a warning to the front page asking people to first read/ be familiar with the Extensions and scripting documentation

> Finally, use the generated code in your Bonsai workflow:

Reviewer: I am good with the solution of the top note. I do think the wording can be changed slightly to soften the tone. "Some familiarity with [Bonsai Scripting Extensions](https://bonsai-rx.org/docs/articles/scripting-extensions.html) may be helpful when using this tool". I defer to your judgement if you think that would be a good change. If you are keeping the original wording, there is a grammar mistake ("strongly recommended" instead of "strong recommend")

:::

## Enums

`Bonsai.Sgen` also supports the generation of enums using the `enum` type in the `json-schema`:

We can replace the `Pet` object in the previous example with an [`enum`](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference/enum):

[Pet as Enum](~/workflows/person-and-pet-enum.json).

```json
(...)

{
  "Pet": {
    "title": "Pet",
    "type": "string",
    "enum": ["Dog", "Cat", "Fish", "Bird", "Reptile"]
  }
},
"type": "object",
"properties": {
  "owner": {"$ref": "#/definitions/Person"},
  "pet": {"$ref": "#/definitions/Pet"}
}
```

In Bonsai, they can be manipulated as [`Enum`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.enum?view=net-9.0) types:

:::workflow
![Person and Pets](~/workflows/person-and-pet-enum.bonsai)
:::

> [!TIP]
> In certain cases, it may be useful to use `x-enum-names` to specify the rendered names of the enum values.
>
> ```json
> {
>   "MyIntEnum": {
>     "enum": [0, 1, 2, 3, 4],
>     "title": "MyIntEnum",
>     "type": "integer",
>     "x-enumNames": ["None", "One", "Two", "Three", "Four"]
>   }
> }
> ```

## Lists

`Bonsai.Sgen` also supports the generation of lists using the `array` type in the `json-schema`:

> 

Author: These dont have corresponding json examples. As it would make the list quite large. If you think its necessary we can prob add them at a later point

```json
"pets": {
  "type": "array",
  "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/Pet"}
}
```

> `json-schema` `array`s will be rendered as [`List<T>`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.collections.generic.list-1?view=net-9.0) in the generated code and can be manipulated (and created) as such.

Author: array is a type, so I move the plural s to the outside haha. NOt sure what the standard is here

:::workflow
![Person and Pets](~/workflows/person-and-pets-enum.bonsai)
:::

## Nullable types

`json-schema` supports the `null` type, which can be used to represent nullable types. The standard is a bit loose in this regard, but `Bonsai.Sgen` will generate a nullable-T if the json-schema represents it using the `oneOf` keyword:

```json
"pet": {
  "oneOf": [
    {"$ref": "#/definitions/Pet"},
    {"type": "null"}
  ]
}
```

For value types, the generated code will render a [Nullable value type](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/builtin-types/nullable-value-types) type. This type will expose two properties: `HasValue` and `Value`, that can be used to test and manipulate the type, respectively.

> For reference types, the generated code will not render a nullable type since reference types are already nullable in C#. A consumer can test for `null` to determine if the value is present by simply using an `ExpressionTransform` operator with `it == null`:

Author: how "about data consumer application"?

For reference types, the generated code will not render a nullable type since reference types are already nullable in C#. An application can test for `null` to determine if the value is present by simply using an `ExpressionTransform` operator with `it == null`:

:::workflow
![Nullable pet](~/workflows/person-and-pet-enum-nullable.bonsai)
:::

## Required fields

`json-schema` supports the [`required`](https://json-schema.org/learn/getting-started-step-by-step#define-required-properties) keyword to specify which fields are required. By default, all fields are optional. This can be useful to enforce the presence of certain fields in the object at deserialization time. However, `Bonsai.Sgen` will not generate any code to enforce this requirement during object construction, only at deserialization. It is up to the user to ensure that the object is correctly populated before using it.

> [!Note]

> > Some confusion may arise about the distinction between `null` and `required`. This is all the more confusing since different languages and libraries may refer to these concepts differently. For the sake of this tool (and honestly in general) the following definitions are used:

Author: ```suggestion
> Some confusion may arise about the distinction between `null` and `required`. This is all the more confusing since different languages and libraries may refer to these concepts in different ways. For the sake of this tool, the following definitions are used:
```
